The Red-Headed League
Arthur Conan Doyle
This text is provided to you “as-is” without any warranty. No warranties of any kind, expressed or implied, are made to you as to the
text or any medium it may be on, including but not limited to warranties of merchantablity or fitness for a particular purpose.
This text was formatted from various free ASCII and HTML variants. See http://sherlock-holm.es for an electronic form of this text
and additional information about it.
This text comes from the collection’s version 3.1.
I
had called upon my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in the autumn of
last year and found him in deep conversation with a very stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman with fiery red hair. With an apology for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw
when Holmes pulled me abruptly into the room
and closed the door behind me.
“You could not possibly have come at a better
time, my dear Watson,” he said cordially.
“I was afraid that you were engaged.”
“So I am. Very much so.”
“Then I can wait in the next room.”
“Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has
been my partner and helper in many of my most
successful cases, and I have no doubt that he will
be of the utmost use to me in yours also.”
The stout gentleman half rose from his chair
and gave a bob of greeting, with a quick little questioning glance from his small fat-encircled eyes.
“Try the settee,” said Holmes, relapsing into his
armchair and putting his fingertips together, as was
his custom when in judicial moods. “I know, my
dear Watson, that you share my love of all that is
bizarre and outside the conventions and humdrum
routine of everyday life. You have shown your relish for it by the enthusiasm which has prompted
you to chronicle, and, if you will excuse my saying
so, somewhat to embellish so many of my own
little adventures.”
“Your cases have indeed been of the greatest
interest to me,” I observed.
“You will remember that I remarked the other
day, just before we went into the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland, that for
strange effects and extraordinary combinations we
must go to life itself, which is always far more
daring than any effort of the imagination.”
“A proposition which I took the liberty of doubting.”
“You did, Doctor, but none the less you must
come round to my view, for otherwise I shall keep
on piling fact upon fact on you until your reason
breaks down under them and acknowledges me
to be right. Now, Mr. Jabez Wilson here has been
good enough to call upon me this morning, and
to begin a narrative which promises to be one of
the most singular which I have listened to for some
time. You have heard me remark that the strangest
and most unique things are very often connected
not with the larger but with the smaller crimes, and
occasionally, indeed, where there is room for doubt
whether any positive crime has been committed.
As far as I have heard it is impossible for me to say
whether the present case is an instance of crime or
not, but the course of events is certainly among the
most singular that I have ever listened to. Perhaps,
Mr. Wilson, you would have the great kindness to
recommence your narrative. I ask you not merely
because my friend Dr. Watson has not heard the
opening part but also because the peculiar nature
of the story makes me anxious to have every possible detail from your lips. As a rule, when I have
heard some slight indication of the course of events,
I am able to guide myself by the thousands of other
similar cases which occur to my memory. In the
present instance I am forced to admit that the facts
are, to the best of my belief, unique.”
The portly client puffed out his chest with an
appearance of some little pride and pulled a dirty
and wrinkled newspaper from the inside pocket of
his greatcoat. As he glanced down the advertisement column, with his head thrust forward and the
paper flattened out upon his knee, I took a good
look at the man and endeavoured, after the fashion
of my companion, to read the indications which
might be presented by his dress or appearance.
I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection. Our visitor bore every mark of being
an average commonplace British tradesman, obese,
pompous, and slow. He wore rather baggy grey
shepherd’s check trousers, a not over-clean black
frock-coat, unbuttoned in the front, and a drab
waistcoat with a heavy brassy Albert chain, and a
square pierced bit of metal dangling down as an
ornament. A frayed top-hat and a faded brown
overcoat with a wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a
chair beside him. Altogether, look as I would, there
was nothing remarkable about the man save his
blazing red head, and the expression of extreme
chagrin and discontent upon his features.
Sherlock Holmes’ quick eye took in my occupation, and he shook his head with a smile as he
noticed my questioning glances. “Beyond the obvious facts that he has at some time done manual
labour, that he takes snuff, that he is a Freemason,
that he has been in China, and that he has done a
considerable amount of writing lately, I can deduce
nothing else.”
Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in his chair, with
his forefinger upon the paper, but his eyes upon
my companion.
“How, in the name of good-fortune, did you
know all that, Mr. Holmes?” he asked. “How did
you know, for example, that I did manual labour.
It’s as true as gospel, for I began as a ship’s carpenter.”
1
“Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is
quite a size larger than your left. You have worked
with it, and the muscles are more developed.”
